README.md, before:

# macOS over QEMU/HVF howto

Examples of running macOS over QEMU on Intel-based Mac hosts with Hypervisor.Framework acceleration (`-accel hvf`)

## A couple of required things

- [Patched QEMU](https://github.com/shchuko/qemu/tree/v5.2.0/darwin-support) (patches are merged into qemu master, but
  not released)

- [Patched UEFI](https://github.com/shchuko/OvmfDarwinPkg)

- [OSK Key retrieval tool](readosk) - required for AppleSMC emulation

- macOS installation app (ex.`/Applications/Install macOS Catalina.app`)

- XCODE Command Line Tools

- [QEMU build requirements](https://wiki.qemu.org/Hosts/Mac)

## Repo content

- [boot-macos.sh](boot-macos.sh) - macOS installation & run script. Invokes tools below in correct order.
  Run `./boot-macos.sh -help` for more information

- [readosk](readosk) - OSK Key retrieval tool sources

- [readosk-build.sh](readosk-build.sh) - readosk build script

- [qemu-build.sh](qemu-build.sh) - QEMU clone & build script

- [glib-build.sh](glib-build.sh) - GLib clone & build script

- [get-firmware.sh](get-firmware.sh) - Patched UEFI download & unpack script

- [create-install-img.sh](create-install-img.sh) - Install disk image creation script. Requires sudo privileges!

- [qemu-system-wrapper.sh](qemu-system-wrapper.sh) - VM boot script. Run `./qemu-system-wrapper.sh -help` for more
  information

- [bridge-utils/*](bridge-utils) - simple wrappers for `ifconfig` to operate with network bridges

## Installation HOWTO

The simplest way to install macOS is:

```bash
# Firstly, run:
./boot-macos.sh -install-macos "Catalina"
# ... to attach installation media
# The drive to install system onto will be created and attached to VM
# Erase it, create APFS using Disk Utility and start OS installation
# After the reboot detach install media and finish installation:
./boot-macos.sh
```

Replace 'Catalina' with required OS name to choose the app you wanted, ex: `/Applications/Install macOS Catalina.app`.

> The script will clone and build QEMU with its GLib dependency,
> retrieve UEFI binaries, create installation media *BaseSystem.cdr*, build `readosk` tool, retrieve OSK key,
> create a drive to install macOS onto, and finally start QEMU VM. Notice that
> [create-install-img.sh](create-install-img.sh) being a part of [boot-macos.sh](boot-macos.sh) requires sudo
> privileges!

After everything is done, to boot your guest macOS just run:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh
```

## Attaching devices

Now you can attach QCOW2 and raw disk images:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.qcow2
./boot-macos.sh -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.raw
```

And network devices:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -net-user # User (slirp) networking
./boot-macos.sh -net-tap # Tap networking
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-shared # vmnet.Framework networking in shared mode (experimental)
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-host # vmnet.Framework networking in host mode (experimental)
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-bridged enX # vmnet.Framework networking in bridged mode, bridged onto enX (experimental)
```

Add as many devices as you need:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -net-user \
  -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.qcow2 \
  -net-tap \
  -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.raw \
  -vmnet-shared 
```

## Boot Order

1. Installation media has the highest boot priority.

2. Default drive has the highest boot priority after installation media.

    * you can detach this drive by passing `-no-default-drive`:

      ```bash
      ./boot-macos.sh -no-default-drive
      ```

3. Other drives' boot order meets this script arguments pass order.

4. Attached netdevs' boot order meets this script arguments pass order.

5. Drives have higher boot priority than netdevs.

## Networking notes

### Tap networking

Requires Tun/Tap kernel extension: `brew install tuntap`. Also, you should run qemu with sudo. Most likely, your
preparation steps should be:

```bash
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-create.sh bridge0
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-add-member en0 bridge0
# Or, the same but simpler:
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-create.sh
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-add-member
```

To remove created bridge:

```bash
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-destroy.sh bridge0
# The same but simpler:
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-destroy.sh
```

Modify [br-add-member.sh](bridge-utils/br-add-member.sh)/[br-rm-member.sh](bridge-utils/br-rm-member.sh) if needed. By
default QEMU-grabbed tapX will be added to the `bridge0`.

**Note:** building QEMU with brew-provided **glib v2.66.7 corrupts tun/tap networking**, the problem is needed to be
investigated. Luckily, everything works fine with glib v2.58.3.

### vmnet.Framework networking

1. Requires sudo
2. This networking type is unstable not and not recommended to use.

Commit message:

boot-macos.sh: boot default drive the first:
Change boot order to:
- default drive (if attached)
- install media (if attached)
- secondary drives
- netdevs

README.md, after:

# macOS over QEMU/HVF howto

Examples of running macOS over QEMU on Intel-based Mac hosts with Hypervisor.Framework acceleration (`-accel hvf`)

## A couple of required things

- [Patched QEMU](https://github.com/shchuko/qemu/tree/v5.2.0/darwin-support) (patches are merged into qemu master, but
  not released)

- [Patched UEFI](https://github.com/shchuko/OvmfDarwinPkg)

- [OSK Key retrieval tool](readosk) - required for AppleSMC emulation

- macOS installation app (ex.`/Applications/Install macOS Catalina.app`)

- XCODE Command Line Tools

- [QEMU build requirements](https://wiki.qemu.org/Hosts/Mac)

## Repo content

- [boot-macos.sh](boot-macos.sh) - macOS installation & run script. Invokes tools below in correct order.
  Run `./boot-macos.sh -help` for more information

- [readosk](readosk) - OSK Key retrieval tool sources

- [readosk-build.sh](readosk-build.sh) - readosk build script

- [qemu-build.sh](qemu-build.sh) - QEMU clone & build script

- [glib-build.sh](glib-build.sh) - GLib clone & build script

- [get-firmware.sh](get-firmware.sh) - Patched UEFI download & unpack script

- [create-install-img.sh](create-install-img.sh) - Install disk image creation script. Requires sudo privileges!

- [qemu-system-wrapper.sh](qemu-system-wrapper.sh) - VM boot script. Run `./qemu-system-wrapper.sh -help` for more
  information

- [bridge-utils/*](bridge-utils) - simple wrappers for `ifconfig` to operate with network bridges

## Installation HOWTO

The simplest way to install macOS is:

```bash
# Firstly, run:
./boot-macos.sh -install-macos "Catalina"
# ... to attach installation media
# The drive to install system onto will be created and attached to VM
# Erase it, create APFS using Disk Utility and start OS installation
# After the reboot detach install media and finish installation:
./boot-macos.sh
```

Replace 'Catalina' with required OS name to choose the app you wanted, ex: `/Applications/Install macOS Catalina.app`.

> The script will clone and build QEMU with its GLib dependency,
> retrieve UEFI binaries, create installation media *BaseSystem.cdr*, build `readosk` tool, retrieve OSK key,
> create a drive to install macOS onto, and finally start QEMU VM. Notice that
> [create-install-img.sh](create-install-img.sh) being a part of [boot-macos.sh](boot-macos.sh) requires sudo
> privileges!

After everything is done, to boot your guest macOS just run:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh
```

## Attaching devices

Now you can attach QCOW2 and raw disk images:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.qcow2
./boot-macos.sh -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.raw
```

And network devices:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -net-user # User (slirp) networking
./boot-macos.sh -net-tap # Tap networking
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-shared # vmnet.Framework networking in shared mode (experimental)
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-host # vmnet.Framework networking in host mode (experimental)
./boot-macos.sh -vmnet-bridged enX # vmnet.Framework networking in bridged mode, bridged onto enX (experimental)
```

Add as many devices as you need:

```bash
./boot-macos.sh -net-user \
  -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.qcow2 \
  -net-tap \
  -drive-qcow2 /path/to/some/image.raw \
  -vmnet-shared 
```

## Boot Order

1. Default drive has the highest boot priority.
    * you can detach this drive by passing `-no-default-drive`:

      ```bash
      ./boot-macos.sh -no-default-drive
      ```
    * you can force to boot from install media by passing `-installmedia-boot`:
      ```bash
      ./boot-macos.sh -install-macos Catalina -installmedia-boot 
      ```
2. Installation media has the highest boot priority after default drive.


3. Other drives' boot order meets this script arguments pass order.

4. Attached netdevs' boot order meets this script arguments pass order.

5. Drives have higher boot priority than netdevs.

## Networking notes

### Tap networking

Requires Tun/Tap kernel extension: `brew install tuntap`. Also, you should run qemu with sudo. Most likely, your
preparation steps should be:

```bash
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-create.sh bridge0
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-add-member en0 bridge0
# Or, the same but simpler:
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-create.sh
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-add-member
```

To remove created bridge:

```bash
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-destroy.sh bridge0
# The same but simpler:
sudo ./bridge-utils/br-destroy.sh
```

Modify [br-add-member.sh](bridge-utils/br-add-member.sh)/[br-rm-member.sh](bridge-utils/br-rm-member.sh) if needed. By
default QEMU-grabbed tapX will be added to the `bridge0`.

**Note:** building QEMU with brew-provided **glib v2.66.7 corrupts tun/tap networking**, the problem is needed to be
investigated. Luckily, everything works fine with glib v2.58.3.

### vmnet.Framework networking

1. Requires sudo
2. This networking type is unstable not and not recommended to use.
